RFC: If statement initializers (#23)
luau-lang/rfcs: docs/syntax-if-statements-initializers.md

# Design

If statements with initializers must match (following the Luau grammar) `'if' 'local' bindinglist ['=' explist] 'then'` and `'local' bindinglist ['=' explist] where exp 'then'` syntax. The variables declared by the initializer are only available to the block of that condition and will be undefined to the `elseif` conditions and blocks as well as the `else` block; any code after the if statement won't have the variables defined either.

In the former case, the value of the first declared variable will be checked.

Example:

```lua
local function foo()
    return true
end

if local b = foo() then
   print(b)
else
   print("false")
end
```

`Output: true`

In the latter case, the `exp` condition is checked rather than the initializer.

Example:

```lua
local function foo()
    return true
end

if local b = foo() where b == false then
   print(b)
else
   print("true")

> end

Reviewer: This actually gave me a motivating reason why it might be useful for `b` to be visible in the `else` branch. Say you have some animal:

```lua
type Dog = { tag: "dog", pet: true, name: string }
type Cat = { tag: "cat", pet: true, name: string }
type Sheep = { tag: "sheep", pet: false }
type Animal = Dog | Cat | Sheep

if local animal = getAnimal() where animal.pet then
  print(`Hello {animal.name}!`)
else
  print(`{animal.tag} is not a pet`) -- generalizes to all current and future `animal.tag`s
end
```

Reviewer 2: Another case:
```
if local success, msg = pcall(f) where success then
    print(`all went well`)
else
    print(`f failed with: {msg}`)
end
```

Author: > This actually gave me a motivating reason why it might be useful for `b` to be visible in the `else` branch. Say you have some animal:
> 
> ```lua
> type Dog = { tag: "dog", pet: true, name: string }
> type Cat = { tag: "cat", pet: true, name: string }
> type Sheep = { tag: "sheep", pet: false }
> type Animal = Dog | Cat | Sheep
> 
> if local animal = getAnimal() where animal.pet then
>   print(`Hello {animal.name}!`)
> else
>   print(`{animal.tag} is not a pet`) -- generalizes to all current and future `animal.tag`s
> end
> ```

> Another case:
> 
> ```
> if local success, msg = pcall(f) where success then
>     print(`all went well`)
> else
>     print(`f failed with: {msg}`)
> end
> ```

Seeing it now allowing `b` to be visible in the `else` branch (and most likely `elseif` branches) would be useful.

Reviewer 3: IMO `pcall` is the most compelling reason to scope the locals this way, but this scoping behavior is a consistent footgun in C++ where bindings in conditions are scoped to the whole if statement and you can trivially end up dereferencing null pointers accidentally using them in the wrong branch. I think, outside of `pcall`, scoping the bindings to the whole block means making more bugs with accidentally using `nil` possible, and I see little benefit since you can already write the following to have this scoping behavior.
```lua
do local success, msg = pcall(f)
    if success then
        print(`all went well`)
    else
        print(`f failed with: {msg}`)
    end
end
```

```

`Output: true`

> When declaring multiple values inside of a condition, all of the variables will be evaluated.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When declaring multiple values inside of a condition, all of the variables will be tested for truthiness.
```

> When declaring multiple values inside of a condition, all of the variables will be evaluated.

Reviewer 4: Just for clarification, how would the variables be combined when being tested? I misread the example at first, so I assumed all variables are combined with `or`, but it actually implies using `and`.

```lua
if local a, b = true, false then
  print("pass")
else
  print("fail")
end

-- same as this?
if local a, b = true, false where a and b then
  print("pass")
else
  print("fail")
end
```

I want to argue that this evaluation is ambiguous, since there is no explicit operation between the variables.

Reviewer: I've come to agree with @vegorov-rbx on making `where` clause required if more than two locals are involved in the initializer. Good example is found here: https://github.com/luau-lang/rfcs/pull/23/files#r1492770178.

Reviewer 5: I think where clauses should just always be a requirement 😰

Reviewer 3: I commented this elsewhere, but I realized this is pretty much a good point to say it in. The desirable behavior IMO is that any variable initialized in an `if local` statement will be tested to be non-`nil`. The direct argument would be that putting the initialization in a _condition_ is an indication that you want it to be bound to some sort of non-`nil` value in the block following it. The forward-looking advantage of this is that it's consistent with how destructuring should behave, e.g. if we allow destructuring tables in local definitions (#24), you could write something like:

```lua
if local {.x, .y, .z} = point then
    -- x, y, z are defined and non-`nil`
end
```

The main downside is that it means the case where you specifically want to test a result for truthiness, rather than non-`nil`ness will require you to write the condition clause, i.e.

```lua
if local cond = bool() then
    -- cond is not `nil`, but could be `true` or `false`
end

if local cond = bool() in cond then
    -- cond is not `nil`, and has been tested `true` by the condition clause
end

if local cond = bool() in not cond then
    -- cond is not `nil`, and has been tested `false` by the condition clause
end
```

I think this is a reasonable decision to make. Requiring `in` is a more conservative choice that is forwards-compatible with this evolution though.

Example:

```lua
local function foo()
    return true, false
end

if local a,b = foo() then
else
    print'Hello World, from Luau!'
end
```

`Output: Hello World, from Luau!`

If statement initializers are also allowed in `elseif` conditions.

Example:

```lua
local a = false
local function foo()
    local b = a
    a = true
    return b
end

if local a = foo() then
elseif local b = foo() then
    print(b)
end
```

`Output: true`

# Drawbacks

Parser recovery may be more fragile due to the `local` keyword.

Initializers increase the complexity of the language syntax and may obscure control flow in complex conditions.

# Alternatives

A different keyword or token can be used in place of `where`.

> Introducing a new contextual keyword can introduce complexity in the parser, and a different existing keyword like `in` or `do` could be used instead.

Reviewer: As a joke, I also thought of using `if` twice, e.g. `if local a, b = foo() if a > b then`. It's not a good idea though in practice.

end
```

```lua
function PlayerControl:GetEntities()
    if self.RemovedSelf then
    elseif local entity = self:TryGetEntity() in entity == nil then
    elseif local index = table.find(self.Instances, entity.Root) then
        table.remove(self.Instances, index)
        self.RemovedSelf = true
    end

    return self.Instances
end
```

# Design

If statements with initializers must match the below grammar. The variables declared by an initializer are only available to the if statement's blocks; any code after the if statement won't have the variables defined.

```diff
  stat = varlist '=' explist |
      ...
      'repeat' block 'until' exp |
-     'if' exp 'then' block {'elseif' exp 'then' block} ['else' block] 'end' |
+     'if' cond 'then' block {'elseif' cond 'then' block} ['else' block] 'end' |
      'for' binding '=' exp ',' exp [',' exp] 'do' block 'end' |
      ...
+ cond = 'local' binding '=' exp ['in' exp] |
+     'local' bindinglist '=' explist 'in' exp |
+     exp
```

In the former case, the value of the first declared variable will be checked.

Example:

```lua
local function foo()
    return true
end

if local b = foo() then
   print(b, "truthy block")
else

>    print(b, "falsy block")

Reviewer: Wanted to add that this design point is one we have to live with in perpetuity. If we decided to take this fallthrough semantics out of this RFC, then we're stuck with that behavior.

Using `boolean` is an ok example, but it doesn't strongly argue for it as opposed to some other example I posted earlier wrt `animal` and one that @vegorov-rbx posted with `pcall` example. If a design point is a "choose now or forever hold your peace," it especially needs an equally as compelling argument to support it.

So I'd rather block the RFC until we are able to agree on this design point, whether locals should fallthrough or not.

An example where the behavior is breaking change would also be good to include in the alternatives section.

```lua
if local x = f() in x % 2 == 0 then
  print(x) --> any even numbers
else
  print(x) --> nil
end
```

As is, this RFC proposes the `print(x)` in the `else` branch to print any odd numbers.

end
```

`Output: true	truthy block`

In the latter case, the `exp` condition is checked rather than the initializer.

Example:

```lua
local function foo()
    return true
end

if local b = foo() in b == false then
   print(b, "truthy block")
else
   print(b, "falsy block")
end
```

`Output: true	falsy block`

When declaring multiple values inside of an initializer, the `in` clause is required.

Example:

```lua
local function foo()
    return true, false
end

if local a, b = foo() in a and b then
else
    print'Hello World, from Luau!'
end
```

> `Output: Hello World, from Luau!`

Reviewer 3: With an eye towards consistent behavior with destructuring in the future, I would prefer to see this changed to requiring `a` and `b` be non-nil implicitly, but it's ultimately okay if we air on the conservative side here since this requirement is forwards-compatible with changing it in the future to mean that. In general, I think the behavior we want though is that using `local a = foo()` and `local a, b = foo()` in a condition will only ever take that branch when the results are non-nil.

Reviewer 6: That makes sense. If you want to allow `b` to either exist or not, you should probably have to say that explicitly. Otherwise the fact that you asked for `local a, b = foo()` probably means that you wanted both `a` and `b` to both exist.

# Motivation

Initializers can improve code clarity and reduce scope pollution by allowing developers to declare variables in the conditions of if statements. ⁤⁤ Declaring variables at the point of use in if statements for the scope of the if statement's block simplifies code, leading to better readability and understanding of program logic. By limiting the scope of variables to the condition's pertaining block, the risk of unintended variable reuse and naming conflicts is reduced. ⁤

The reduced scope pollution improves register space in extreme cases (or auto-generated code) where developers have many variables defined and have to work around register limits by reducing the register size. In some scenarios, especially on Roblox, initializing variables within if statements can lead to improved performance and reduced complexity by avoiding unnecessary calls by developers. ⁤ A common paradigm used by Roblox developers is to use `Instance:FindFirstChild` in their condition and then access it afterwards instead of keeping an existing variable around in the new scope, polluting the existing scope.

# Design

> If statements with initializers must match (following the Luau grammar) `'if' 'local' bindinglist ['=' explist] 'then'` and `'local' bindinglist ['=' explist] where exp 'then'` syntax. Parenthesis are also allowed around the initializer for consistency with other expressions. The variables declared by the initializer are only available to the block of that condition and will be undefined to the `elseif` conditions and blocks as well as the `else` block; any code after the if statement won't have the variables defined either.

Reviewer 2: > Parenthesis are also allowed around the initializer for consistency with other expressions.

Can you give an example?

Author: > Can you give an example? I'm not sure what you mean here and I hope it's not `if (local a = foo()) then`

That is exactly what it means, I felt it would be awkward to not allow `if (local a = foo()) where (a == 15) then`.

Reviewer 2: That will be a 'no' from me.

Author: The syntax would be inconsistent but it can be changed if it is somehow a problem, I feel it might be weird if you're writing out a condition and the initializer itself cant be parenthesized.

Reviewer 2: It will actually be consistent, `()` is part of the expression grammar, local is a part of the if statement grammar.
The ability to write `if (a == 2)` like in other languages is just a coincidence of the ability to write group expressions.

Author: > It will actually be consistent if it's removed; `()` is part of the expression grammar, local is a part of the if statement grammar. 

I guess that would also be fitting, I updated the RFC to remove that.

# Motivation

Initializers can improve code clarity and reduce scope pollution by allowing developers to declare variables in the conditions of if statements. ⁤⁤ Declaring variables at the point of use in if statements for the scope of the if statement's blocks simplifies code, leading to better readability and understanding of program logic. By limiting the scope of variables to the if statement's blocks, the risk of unintended variable reuse and naming conflicts is reduced. ⁤

The reduced scope pollution improves register space in extreme cases (or auto-generated code) where developers have many variables defined and have to work around register limits by reducing the register size. In some scenarios, especially on Roblox, initializing variables within if statements can lead to improved performance and reduced complexity by avoiding unnecessary calls by developers. ⁤ A common paradigm used by Roblox developers is to use `Instance:FindFirstChild` in their condition and then access it afterwards instead of keeping an existing variable around in the new scope, polluting the existing scope.

# Design

> If statements with initializers must match (following the Luau grammar) `'if' 'local' bindinglist ['=' explist] 'then'` and `'local' bindinglist ['=' explist] where exp 'then'` syntax. The variables declared by an initializer are only available to the if statement's blocks; any code after the if statement won't have the variables defined.

Reviewer: This grammar has two issues: it lets you omit the expression, and it still allows for multiple bindings without a `where` clause. You probably want (taken from https://luau-lang.org/grammar):

```diff
  stat = varlist '=' explist |
      ...
      'repeat' block 'until' exp |
-     'if' exp 'then' block {'elseif' exp 'then' block} ['else' block] 'end' |
+     'if' cond 'then' block {'elseif' cond 'then' block} ['else' block] 'end' |
      'for' binding '=' exp ',' exp [',' exp] 'do' block 'end' |

- ifelseexp = 'if' exp 'then' exp {'elseif' exp 'then' exp} 'else' exp
+ ifelseexp = 'if' cond 'then' exp {'elseif' cond 'then' exp} 'else' exp

+ cond = 'local' binding '=' exp ['where' exp] |
+     'local' bindinglist '=' explist 'where' exp |
+     exp
```

I also noticed that my ask for adding initializers in `if` expressions earlier (reflected above) also permits this:

```lua
if local x = if local ok, res = pcall(f) where ok then res else nil where x == nil then
  -- ...
end
```

and I think we'd all want to live without seeing that.

Author: I'll update my grammar examples with your change, are you asking for if expressions with initializers too or are you against them?

Reviewer: I think allowing initializers in `if` expressions is ok.

Reviewer 2: I know that implementation complexity is sometimes completely ignored during design of a language, but I would suggest excluding extension of `if` expressions with this.
Reason being that current compiler model doesn't support local allocations inside expressions (all expression registers are temporary and can be clobbered).
I would understand if there was a great motivation for `if` expressions to rewrite large parts of the compiler, but seeing that this was more of an after-thought and nice-to-have, I suggest excluding them to a separate proposal (and I would probably ask for a compiler prototype in that).

Note that this will also be a reason why `do ... end` cannot become an expression so easily.

# Design

If statements with initializers must match the below grammar. The variables declared by an initializer are only available to the if statement's blocks; any code after the if statement won't have the variables defined.

```diff
  stat = varlist '=' explist |
      ...
      'repeat' block 'until' exp |
-     'if' exp 'then' block {'elseif' exp 'then' block} ['else' block] 'end' |
+     'if' cond 'then' block {'elseif' cond 'then' block} ['else' block] 'end' |
      'for' binding '=' exp ',' exp [',' exp] 'do' block 'end' |
      ...

> 
> - ifelseexp = 'if' exp 'then' exp {'elseif' exp 'then' exp} 'else' exp
> + ifelseexp = 'if' cond 'then' exp {'elseif' cond 'then' exp} 'else' exp
> 

Reviewer: This still proposes the `if` expression changes.
```suggestion

```
